---
layout: full-width
title: Current research
permalink: /current-research/
weight: 2
---



# Under Review: 

**Partisan motivation and candidate traits - Trustworthiness matters more for out-party than in-party candidate evaluations.** (with Lasse Laustsen) [pdf]({{site.baseurl}}/assets/pdf/Bor_Laustsen_web.pdf). 

It is well known that partisans are biased to view their own candidates through rose-colored glasses but see competing candidates in a much more negative light. However, recent advances in political behavior research reveal that motivated reasoning is not simply about love and hate but may also promote more nuanced shifts in preferences. We incorporate this insight into the novel trend of studying the importance of specific character traits on candidate evaluations. Specifically, we propose that as the ill intentions of an out-party candidate are much more likely to be costly for a voter than similar intentions of an in-party candidate, people need to pay special attention to the former’s trustworthiness. We test this prediction using all available representative election surveys including voter impressions of candidate trustworthiness encompassing twenty-three elections from a diverse set of seven countries (Australia, Denmark, Germany, Norway, Sweden, UK, and USA) and spanning two decades. We find that trustworthiness in out-party candidates is consistently more strongly associated with global candidate evaluations than for in-party candidates. Importantly, the heterogeneous role played by trustworthiness in out- and in-party candidate evaluations is contrasted with competence and strong leadership, two other influential character traits in candidate evaluations, which are not weighted more heavily for out-party candidates. The results stress the importance of applying a multifaceted framework of candidate character and that impressions of trustworthiness, in particular, are intertwined with partisan-based reasoning about candidates. We conclude by discussing the implications of the results for models of candidate evaluations, party switching and citizens’ acceptance of authoritative decisions.


**When should the majority rule? Experimental evidence for Madisonian judgments in five cultures** (with Honorata Mazepus, Scott Bokemper & Peter DeScioli) [pdf]({{site.baseurl}}/assets/pdf/bor_madison_web.pdf). 

Societies need to make collective decisions even when individuals disagree. In diverse settings from governments to small groups, people use multiple basic rules for collective choice including voting, consensus, leadership, and chance, along with many intricate elaborations of these rules. Here we study the psychology behind how people think that groups should decide, focusing especially on when they think voting is appropriate. Participants in five countries read scenarios about a small group that needs to make a collective decision even though they disagree. In a between-subject design, we manipulated whether the group had a vulnerable minority—a smaller number of people who had more at stake than the majority. We find that participants from all five countries generally preferred majority-rule voting for collective decisions, but when the group included a vulnerable minority, participants opposed voting and instead preferred consensus for making the group’s choice. We discuss implications for how people judge the legitimacy of voting as a rule for resolving societal disagreements. 

# Work in progress: 

**Why so angry? Understanding hostility in online political discussions** (with Michael Bang Petersen)

Across Western democracies, online discussions about politics are considered uncivil, aggressive and hostile. Previous evolutionary research has explained this online political hostility as the result of the evolutionarily novel psychophysics of online environments: Lack of face-to-face interaction etc. down-regulate empathy and prompt hostility as a result of lack of emotion-regulation. On this explanation, online political hostility thus reflects an evolutionary mismatch. In contrast, we integrate (i) classical work on the adaptive functions of aggression and (ii) recent evidence on social media behavior to propose that online political hostility is deliberately employed as an instrumental strategy to further particular political agendas. We investigate this using a large representative sample of US citizens (N = 1500). Against the mismatch account, we find that individuals who are hostile online are equally likely to be hostile offline. Consistent with adaptive accounts of aggression, these individuals are motivated by status and seek to challenge existing political hierarchies. To this end, they invest more in online (vs. offline) political discussions as these discussions offer greater benefits (e.g., more interactions and greater reach) at lower costs. Thus, the hostility of online political discussions reflects a strategic investment in online discussions by aggressive-prone individuals rather than an evolutionary mismatch.


**Humans detect honest facial signals of leadership in chimpanzees** (with Schreiber D., Brosnan S., Lambeth S., Schapiro S., de Waal F., & Van Vugt M.)

Humans rely on facial cues to assess the leadership ability of their peers, which affects the selection and assessment of leaders in political and business settings. Prominent theoretical explanations propose that facial cues serve as inputs into an adaptive, context-sensitive followership psychology. Here, we push this evolutionary explanation further by testing if humans are able to identify chimpanzee (pan troglodytes) leaders. Importantly, we do not claim that detecting leadership across species had adaptive benefits. Instead, we argue that it is reasonable to assume that facial cues of leadership may be similar across humans and chimps due to convergences and/or homologies and that humans’ facial cue detecting mechanisms are triggered by encountering chimpanzee faces. We, therefore, predict that alpha chimpanzees will be perceived to be more dominant and leader-looking than non-alpha chimpanzees. We test our hypothesis relying on a unique inventory of over 150 standardized photographs of more than 70 captive adult male chimpanzees from three colonies. Naive human raters recruited on Amazon’s Mechanical Turk rated these photographs on six traits (dominance, age, leader ability, attractiveness, likability and competence). Subsequently, we compare the average trait ratings of alpha and non-alpha targets. Preliminary results show that interrater reliability of evaluations are very high and that alpha males are rated higher on dominance, age and leader ability. 